A trio of researchers with the University of Manchester, Università di 
Roma 'La Sapienza' and Sorbonne Universities has sparked a major debate
among cosmologists by claiming that data from the Planck space observatory 
suggests the universe is a sphere—not flat, as current conventional theory 
suggests. In their paper published in the journal Nature Astronomy, 
Eleonora Di Valentino, Alessandro Melchiorri and Joseph Silk outline 
their arguments and suggest their findings indicate that there exists 
a cosmological crisis that must be addressed.
Conventional theory, which backs inflation theory, suggests that after the 
Big Bang, the universe expanded in a way that was flat—two lights shone 
in parallel would travel forever in parallel. But now, after studying 
data sent back to Earth from the Planck space observatory (which mapped 
cosmic microwave background radiation over the years 2009 to 2013) 
Di Valentino, Melchiorri and Silk have come to disagree with conventional 
thinking. They claim that there is evidence that the universe is closed—that 
it is shaped like a sphere. If you shine two lights into the dark of space, 
they suggest, at some point, the light would come back around to you from 
behind.
The researchers came to this conclusion after looking at data from the 
Planck space observatory that showed a discrepancy between the concentration 
of dark matter and dark energy and outward expansion; there was more 
gravitational lensing than theory has predicted. Such an imbalance, 
they claim, would have the universe collapsing in on itself, resulting 
in a sphere shape. Others who have looked at the same data prior to this 
new effort have called the data from the observatory a statistical fluke. 
The research trio note that there are other problems with the flat theory 
as well, such as scientists' inability to accurately measure the Hubble 
constant; each team that tries finds a different answer. There have also 
been problems with reconciling surveys of dark energy with a flat model. 
They conclude by acknowledging that with current technology there is no way 
to settle the debate—new devices will need to be invented that will be able 
to measure microwave background radiation in ways not subject to debate.